---
date: 2024-05-01
---

# The need for new approaches in software engineering

While software systems have long had an impact on our well-being, the extent to 
which software permeates our lives today makes it even more important that
development teams consider not just individual usability and user experience.
Rather, they need to understand and appreciate the social relationships that 
make up our lives.

<!-- more -->

Software engineering has made much progress in ensuring that software does
behave the way its creators intended it to. Unfortunately, as [argued in a
recent discussion paper], there has not been similar progress in ensuring that
this behavior serves the needs of the users, others affected by the use of the
software.

In response, there is a renewed interest in technology ethics as expressed, for
example initiatives to teach computer science students the fundamentals of
ethics. The [embedded ethics initiative] at Harvard is an example of such
efforts. Similarly, law makers in a range of jurisdictions are working on 
regulatory mechanisms.

However, while these efforts are certainly useful when used diligently, they
need translating into software engineering practice. Software engineers have
languages for expressing functional behavior of software but lack a vocabulary 
for the right social relations that make up our human world. This is why we are
working on a set of tools that are inspired by [behavior-driven development]
(BDD) and aim to do for the question "are we building the right software" what
BDD did for the question "are we building the software right?"

Over the coming weeks and months you should see some activity here in this
space, so stay tuned.


[blog plugin]: https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/plugins/blog/
[Material for MkDocs]: https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material
[argued in a recent discussion paper]: https://dash.harvard.edu/handle/1/37373560
[embedded ethics initiative]: https://embeddedethics.seas.harvard.edu/
